# VSCode Writing Template

This Visual Studio Code Workspace provides a base template for setting up a writing project using Visual Studio Code.

## What's Included

* The ability to write your work in Markdown files
* An EPUB compilation script
* A per-chapter word counting script
* A Visual Studio Workspace with some opinionated default settings:
  * 80-column wide editor
  * Word-wrap on column width
  * Full-screen, centered, Zen-mode (Ctrl+K, Z)
  * A large, serif, font setting for editing Markdown files

I say "opinionated" because these settings work for my personal projects and tastes, but may not necessarily work for *your* projects.

## Rationale

For the longest time, I've used Org-Mode for Emacs to keep my notes, write fiction, and maintain a journal. However, I'm not the biggest fan of Emacs Lisp and out of frustration began to experiment with different ways of writing and maintain a writing environment. Being a programmer, I use VSCode to write my code, and in 2016 noticed that Zen mode was added to the program. This mode places you in a distraction free coding environment, very reminiscent of distraction free writing environments in writing-specific text editors. So, even though VSCode is not designed with writing in mind per se, it can be a decent writing environment with some creative configuration.

## Prerequisites

In order to run the included compilation scripts, you must have [Pandoc](https://pandoc.org/installing.html) as well as [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/download/) installed.

The default font for editing Markdown files is configured as "[Source Serif Pro Light](https://github.com/adobe-fonts/source-serif-pro)", but, like all other settings, is easily changed to something else by editing the code-workspace file. If the font is not present on your system, it will default to a generic Serif font.

## Installation

After installing the prerequisites, simply fork this repository or clone it onto your system. Once in the project directory, run `npm install` to install the project's Node.js dependencies.

If you want to start a fresh git history for your project, delete the `.git` directory and run `git init` etc. as usual.

Things you'll want to change immediately are:

* The contents of `chapters/metadata.yaml` (see EPUB Metadata below)
* The details in `package.json`

## Project Structure

Chapters are stored as individual Markdown files in the `chapters` directory.

Any file generated as the result of a script can be found in the `output` directory.

Scripts executed by npm are stored in the `scripts` directory and any assets used by these scripts are stored in `scripts/assets`.

Any Markdown file part of this workspace will inherit the global Markdown editor settings, so feel free to add subdirectories as needed. I usually create a `research` directory and  a `ditched` directory for my worldbuilding and scraps, respectively.

## Included Scripts

* `npm run wordcount` runs an estimated word count of all the chapters.
* `npm run compile` compiles all chapters into an EPUB file.

## EPUB Compilation

During compilation, files are read from the file system in order, so maintain a sort-friendly filename system. I recommend prefixing a chapter number to the filename for fiction, or an ISO-8601 type date format for journaling, e.g.:

* 001-chapter-name.md
* 2020-09-20-journal.md
* 2020-journal.md

If you prefer to maintain a custom file/chapter order, you can modify the `scripts/compile.js` file to your liking.

## EPUB Metadata

The file `chapters/metadata.yaml` is a YAML file containing the metadata for the EPUB file generated by the compilation script. The provided file is a minimum viable sample file. However, for real projects, I suggest reading [the Pandoc documentation](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html#epub-metadata) for this specific file since you will very likely want to customize this.

## License

This project is MIT licensed, see the `LICENSE` file for details.
